[DOCS-2904] NDM profile and simulation data format guide (#12458)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/network_monitoring/devices/guide/profile-and-simulation-data-reference.md

---
title: Profile Format and Simulation Data Reference
kind: guide
---

## Overview

Datadog [Network Device Monitoring][1] (NDM) uses profiles for collecting metrics from network devices. NDM profiles use [SNMP concepts][2]. Use this guide as reference when formatting a [Network Device Monitoring profile][3] or simulation data.

## Profile format

### Structure

> An SNMP profile is materialized as a YAML file with the following structure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an SNMP profile as a YAML file with the following structure:
```
the term materialized makes it sound like sorcery

  - MIB: ISILON-MIB
    symbol:
      OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.12124.1.1.2
      name: clusterHealth
  - MIB: ISILON-MIB
    symbol:
      OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.12124.1.2.1.1
      name: clusterIfsInBytes
  - MIB: ISILON-MIB
    symbol:
      OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.12124.1.2.1.3
      name: clusterIfsOutBytes
```

**Note**: Symbol metrics from the same `MIB` must still be listed as separate `metrics` entries, as shown above.

For example, this is _not_ valid syntax:

```yaml
metrics:
  - MIB: ISILON-MIB
    symbol:
      - OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.12124.1.2.1.1
        name: clusterIfsInBytes
      - OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.12124.1.2.1.3
        name: clusterIfsOutBytes
```

##### Table metrics

An SNMP table is an object that is composed of multiple entries ("rows"), where each entry contains values a set of symbols ("columns").

In a MIB file, tables be recognized by the presence of `SEQUENCE OF`:

```asn
exampleTable OBJECT-TYPE
    SYNTAX   SEQUENCE OF exampleEntry
    -- ...
    ::= { example 10 }

exampleEntry OBJECT-TYPE
   -- ...
   ::= { exampleTable 1 }

exampleColumn1 OBJECT-TYPE
   -- ...
   ::= { exampleEntry 1 }

exampleColumn2 OBJECT-TYPE
   -- ...
   ::= { exampleEntry 2 }

-- ...
```

> In profiles, tables can be specified as entries containing the `MIB`, `table` and `symbols` fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In profiles, tables can be specified as entries containing the `MIB`, `table`, and `symbols` fields:
```

```yaml
metrics:
  - MIB: CISCO-IF-EXTENSION-MIB
    forced_type: monotonic_count
    table:
      OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.276.1.1.2
      name: cieIfInterfaceTable
    symbols:
      - OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.276.1.1.2.1.1
        name: cieIfResetCount
    metric_tags:
      - MIB: IF-MIB
        column:
          OID: 1.3.6.1.2.1.31.1.1.1.1
          name: ifName
        table: ifXTable
        tag: interface
```

###### Using a column from a different table with different indexes

```yaml
metrics:
  - MIB: CPI-UNITY-MIB
    table:
      OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.30932.1.10.1.3.110
      name: cpiPduBranchTable
    symbols:
      - OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.30932.1.10.1.3.110.1.3
        name: cpiPduBranchCurrent
    metric_tags:
      - column:
          OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.30932.1.10.1.2.10.1.3
          name: cpiPduName
        table: cpiPduTable
        index_transform:
          - start: 1
            end: 7
        tag: pdu_name
```

If the external table has different indexes, use `index_transform` to select a subset of the full index. `index_transform` is a list of `start`/`end` ranges to extract from the current table index to match the external table index. `start` and `end` are inclusive.

> External table indexes must be a subset of the indexes of the current table, or same indexes in a different order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
External table indexes must be a subset of the indexes of the current table, or the same indexes in a different order.
```

In the example above, the index of `cpiPduBranchTable` looks like `1.6.0.36.155.53.3.246`, the first digit is the `cpiPduBranchId` index and the rest is the `cpiPduBranchMac` index. The index of `cpiPduTable` looks like `6.0.36.155.53.3.246` and represents `cpiPduMac` (equivalent to `cpiPduBranchMac`).

By using the `index_transform` with start 1 and end 7, it extracts `6.0.36.155.53.3.246` from `1.6.0.36.155.53.3.246` (`cpiPduBranchTable` full index), and then use it to match `6.0.36.155.53.3.246` (`cpiPduTable` full index).

> `index_transform` can be more complex, the following definition extracts `2.3.5.6.7` from `1.2.3.4.5.6.7`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An `index_transform` can be more complex; the following definition extracts `2.3.5.6.7` from `1.2.3.4.5.6.7`:
```

```yaml
        index_transform:
          - start: 1
            end: 2
          - start: 4
            end: 6
```

###### Using an index

"_index_" refers to one digit of the index part of the row OID. For example, if the column OID is `1.2.3.1.2` and the row OID is `1.2.3.1.2.7.8.9`, the full index is `7.8.9`. In this example, when using `index: 1`, it refers to `7`, `index: 2` refers to `8`, and so on.

```yaml
metrics:
  - MIB: CISCO-PROCESS-MIB
    table:
      OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.109.1.1.1
      name: cpmCPUTotalTable
    symbols:
      - OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.109.1.1.1.1.12
        name: cpmCPUMemoryUsed
    metric_tags:
      # This tagging method is more complex, so let's walk through an example...
      #
      # In CISCO-PROCESS-MIB, entries in the `cpmCPUTotalTable` are indexed by `cpmCPUTotalIndex`,
      # which corresponds to some sort of CPU position for each row in the table:
      #
      #   cpmCPUTotalEntry OBJECT-TYPE
      #      -- ...
      #      INDEX    { cpmCPUTotalIndex }  # <-- See?
      #
      # Tag metrics in this table by this CPU position.
      #

>       # To do this, look up the position of this OID in `INDEX`. Here it's in first position.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      # To do this, look up the position of this OID in `INDEX`. Here it's in the first position.
```

      # Reference it here using `index: 1`.

>       # (If there were two OIDs in `INDEX`, and you wanted to use the one in second position, use `index: 2`.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      # (If there were two OIDs in `INDEX`, and you wanted to use the one in the second position, use `index: 2`.)
```

      #
      # NOTE: currently only indexes that refer to a column in the same table are supported.
      - tag: cpu
        index: 1
```

###### Mapping index to tag string value

You can use the following syntax to map indexes to tag string values. In the example below, the submitted metric is `snmp.ipSystemStatsHCInReceives` with tag `ipversion:ipv6`.

```yaml
metrics:
- MIB: IP-MIB
  table:
    OID: 1.3.6.1.2.1.4.31.1
    name: ipSystemStatsTable
  forced_type: monotonic_count
  symbols:
  - OID: 1.3.6.1.2.1.4.31.1.1.4
    name: ipSystemStatsHCInReceives
  metric_tags:
  - index: 1
    tag: ipversion
    mapping:
      0: unknown
      1: ipv4
      2: ipv6
      3: ipv4z
      4: ipv6z
      16: dns
```

> See meaning of index as used here in [Using an index](#using-an-index) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the meaning of `index` as used here in [Using an index](#using-an-index) section.
```

| `Integer`             | `gauge`              |
| `Integer32`           | `gauge`              |
| `CounterBasedGauge64` | `gauge`              |
| `Opaque`              | `gauge`              |

SNMP types not listed in this table are submitted as `gauge` by default.

##### Forced metric types

Sometimes the inferred type may not be what you want. Typically, OIDs that represent "total number of X" are defined as `Counter32` in MIBs, but you probably want to submit them `monotonic_count` instead of a `rate`.

For such cases, you can define a `forced_type`. Possible values and their effect are listed below.

| Forced type                | Description                                                  |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `gauge`                    | Submit as a gauge.                                           |
| `rate`                     | Submit as a rate.                                            |
| `percent`                  | Multiply by 100 and submit as a rate.                        |
| `monotonic_count`          | Submit as a monotonic count.                                 |

> | `monotonic_count_and_rate` | Submit 2 copies of the metric: one as a monotonic count, and one as a rate (suffixed with `.rate`). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `monotonic_count_and_rate` | Submit two copies of the metric: one as a monotonic count, and one as a rate (suffixed with `.rate`). |
```

> | `flag_stream`              | Submit each flag of a flag stream as individual metric with value `0` or `1`. See [Flag Stream section](#flag-stream). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `flag_stream`              | Submit each flag of a flag stream as an individual metric with value `0` or `1`. See [Flag Stream section](#flag-stream). |
```

      name: ipSystemStatsHCInReceives
    - OID: 1.3.6.1.2.1.4.31.1.1.6
      name: ipSystemStatsHCInOctets
```

**Note**: When used on a table metrics entry, `forced_type` is applied to _all_ symbols in the entry.

So, if a table contains symbols of varying types, you should use multiple `metrics` entries: one for symbols with inferred metric types, and one for each `forced_type`. For example:

```yaml
metrics:
  - MIB: F5-BIGIP-LOCAL-MIB
    table:
      OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.3375.2.2.5.2.3
      name: ltmPoolStatTable
    # No `forced_type` specified => metric types are inferred.
    symbols:
      - OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.3375.2.2.5.2.3.1.2
        name: ltmPoolStatServerPktsIn
      - OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.3375.2.2.5.2.3.1.4
        name: ltmPoolStatServerPktsOut
      # ...

  - MIB: F5-BIGIP-LOCAL-MIB
    table:
      OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.3375.2.2.5.2.3
      name: ltmPoolStatTable
    forced_type: monotonic_count
    # All these symbols are submitted as monotonic counts.
    symbols:
      - OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.3375.2.2.5.2.3.1.7
        name: ltmPoolStatServerTotConns
      - OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.3375.2.2.5.2.3.1.23
        name: ltmPoolStatConnqServiced
      # ...
```

###### Flag stream

> When the value is a flag stream like `010101`, you can use `forced_type: flag_stream` to submit each flag as individual metric with value `0` or `1`. Two options are required when using `flag_stream`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the value is a flag stream like `010101`, you can use `forced_type: flag_stream` to submit each flag as an individual metric with value `0` or `1`. Two options are required when using `flag_stream`:
```

> - `options.placement`: position of the flag in the flag stream (1-based indexing, first element is placement 1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `options.placement`: position of the flag in the flag stream (1-based indexing, the first element is placement 1).
```

- `options.metric_suffix`: suffix appended to the metric name for a specific flag, usually matching the name of the flag.

For example:

```yaml
metrics:
  - MIB: PowerNet-MIB
    symbol:
      OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.318.1.1.1.11.1.1.0
      name: upsBasicStateOutputState
    forced_type: flag_stream
    options:
      placement: 4
      metric_suffix: OnLine
  - MIB: PowerNet-MIB
    symbol:
      OID: 1.3.6.1.4.1.318.1.1.1.11.1.1.0
      name: upsBasicStateOutputState
    forced_type: flag_stream
    options:
      placement: 5
      metric_suffix: ReplaceBattery
```

This example submits two metrics, `snmp.upsBasicStateOutputState.OnLine` and `snmp.upsBasicStateOutputState.ReplaceBattery`, with value `0` or `1`.

[Example of flag_stream usage in a profile][6].

##### Extract value

> If the metric value to be submitted is from a OID with string value and needs to be extracted from it, you can use extract value feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the metric value to be submitted is from an OID with astring value and needs to be extracted, you can use the extract value feature.
```

`extract_value` is a regex pattern with one capture group like `(\d+)C`, where the capture group is `(\d+)`.

Example use cases respective regex patterns:

- stripping the C unit from a temperature value: `(\d+)C`
- stripping the USD unit from a currency value: `USD(\d+)`
- stripping the F unit from a temperature value with spaces between the metric and the unit: `(\d+) *F`

For example:

**Scalar Metric Example:**

```yaml
metrics:
  - MIB: MY-MIB
    symbol:
      OID: 1.2.3.4.5.6.7
      name: temperature
      extract_value: '(\d+)C'
```

**Table Column Metric Example:**

```yaml
metrics:
  - MIB: MY-MIB
    table:
      OID: 1.2.3.4.5.6
      name: myTable
    symbols:
      - OID: 1.2.3.4.5.6.7
        name: temperature
        extract_value: '(\d+)C'
    # ...
```

> In the examples above, the OID value is a SNMP OctetString value `22C` and `22` is submitted as value for `snmp.temperature`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the examples above, the OID value is an SNMP OctetString value `22C`, and `22` is submitted as value for `snmp.temperature`.
```

#### `metric_tags`

_(Optional)_

> This field is used to apply tags to all metrics collected by the profile. It has the same meaning than the instance-level config option (see [`conf.yaml.example`][7]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This field applies tags to all metrics collected by the profile. It has the same meaning as the instance-level config option (see [`conf.yaml.example`][7]).
```
